## **Programmed I/O** 

PIO was commonly used in the early days of the PC because designers were reluctant to add the expense or complexity to their devices of transaction man‐ agement logic. The processor could do the job faster than any other device any‐ way so, in this model, it handles all the work. For example, if a PCI device 

**18** 

**Chapter 1: Background** 

interrupts the CPU to indicate that it needs to put data in memory, the CPU will end up reading data from the PCI device into an internal register and then copying that register to memory. Going the other way, if data is to be moved from memory to the PCI device, software instructs the CPU to read from mem‐ ory into its internal register and then write that register to the PCI device. 

The process works but is inefficient for two reasons. First, there are two bus cycles generated by the CPU for every data transfer, and second, the CPU is busy with data transfer housekeeping rather than more interesting work. In the early days this was the fastest transfer method and the single‐tasking processor didn’t have much else to do. These types of inefficiencies are typically not acceptable in modern systems, so this method is no longer very common for data transfers, and instead the DMA method described in the next section is the preferred approach. However, programmed IO is still a necessary transaction model in order for software to interact with a device. 

_Figure 1‐6: PCI Transaction Models_ 

**==> picture [380 x 226] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Processor<br>FSB Programmed I/O<br>Graphics<br>NorthNorthBridgBridge<br>(Intel 440(Intel 440 ) S DRAM<br>Address Port Data Port<br>DMA<br>PCI 33 MHz<br>Peer<br>to<br>Peer Slots<br>IDE<br>CD HDD<br>USB South Bridge LogicError Ethernet SCSI<br>ISA<br>Boot Modem Audio Super<br>ROM Chip Chip I/O<br>COM1<br>COM2<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>