## **Configuration Address Space** 

The first PCs required users to set switches and jumpers to assign resources for each card installed and this frequently resulted in conflicting memory, IO and interrupt settings. The subsequent IO architectures, Extended ISA (EISA) and the IBM PS2 systems, were the first to implemented plug and play architectures. In these architectures configuration files were shipped with each plug‐in card that allowed system software to assign basic resources. PCI extended this capa‐ bility by implementing standardized configuration registers that permit generic shrink‐wrapped OSs to manage virtually all system resources. Having a stan‐ dard way to enable error reporting, interrupt delivery, address mapping and more, allows one entity, the configuration software, to allocate and configure the system resources which virtually eliminates resource conflicts. 

PCI defines a dedicated block of configuration address space for each Function. Registers mapped into the configuration space allow software to discover the existence of a Function, configure it for normal operation and check the status of the Function. Most of the basic functionality that needs to be standardized is in the header portion of the configuration register block, but the PCI architects realized that it would beneficial to standardize optional features, called capabil‐ ity structures (e.g. Power Management, Hot Plug, etc.). The PCI‐Compatible configuration space includes 256 bytes for each Function. 