|when the table has been loaded into the Arbiter.||||||||||||
|Port VC Control Register<br>Port VC Status Register||||||||||||
|15<br>15                                            1 0||||4||3     1||0||||
|RsvdZ|RsvdP|||||||||||
|VC Arbitration Select (000b-111b)||||||||||||
|Load VC Arbitration<br>VC Arbitration Table Status||||Table||||||||



**260** 

**Chapter 7: Quality of Service** 

## **Port Arbitration** 

## **General** 

Switch ports and root ports will often receive incoming packets that need to be routed to another port. Since packets arriving from multiple ports can all target the same VC in the same outgoing port, arbitration is needed to decide which incoming port’s packet gets next access to that VC. Like VC arbitration, port arbitration has several optional schemes available for selection by configuration software. The combination of TCs, VCs, and arbitration support a range of ser‐ vice levels that fall into two broad categories: 

**1. Asynchronous** — Packets get “best effort” service and may receive no prefer‐ ence at all. Many devices and applications, like mass storage devices, have no stringent requirements for bandwidth or latency and don’t need special timing mechanisms. On the other hand, packets generated by more demanding appli‐ cations can still be prioritized without much trouble by establishing a hierarchy of traffic classes for different packets. Differentiated service is still considered to be asynchronous until the level of service requires guarantees. Naturally, asyn‐ chronous service is always available and doesn’t need any special software or hardware options. 

**2. Isochronous** — When latency and bandwidth guarantees are needed, we move into the isochronous category. This would be useful when a synchronous connection would normally be required between two devices. For example, a CD‐ROM sourcing data from a music CD uses a synchronous connection when a headset is plugged directly into the drive. However, when the audio must be routed across a general‐purpose bus like PCIe to get to external speakers, the connection cannot be synchronous because other traffic may also need to use the same data stream. To achieve an equivalent result, isochronous service must guarantee proper delivery of the time‐sensitive audio data without preventing other traffic from using the Link during the same time. Not surprisingly, spe‐ cialized software and hardware are needed to support this. 

The concept of port arbitration is pictured in Figure 7‐14 on page 262. Note that port arbitration exists in several places in a system: 

- Egress ports of switches 

- Root Complex ports when peer‐to‐peer transactions are supported 

- Root Complex egress ports that lead to targets such as main memory 

**261** 

## **PCI Ex ress Technolo p gy** 

Port arbitration will usually need software configuration for each virtual chan‐ nel supported by a switch or root egress port. In the example below, root port 2 supports peer‐to‐peer transfers from root ports 1 and 2 and therefore needs port arbitration. It should be noted, though, that peer‐to‐peer support between root ports is optional, so it may be that not every root egress port would need port arbitration. 

The connection to system memory is an interesting path. There will likely be packets from multiple ingress ports trying to access this port at the same time, so it needs to support port arbitration. However, it doesn’t use a PCIe port, so it doesn’t have the set of PCIe registers to support arbitration that we’re describ‐ ing here. Instead, the root will need to supply a vendor‐specific set of registers called a Root Complex Register Block (RCRB) to provide the same functionality. 

Because port arbitration is managed independently for each VC of the egress port, a separate table is required for each VC that supports programmable port arbitration, as shown in Figure 7‐15 on page 263. Port arbitration tables are sup‐ ported only by switches and root ports and are not allowed in endpoints. 

_Figure 7‐14: Port Arbitration Concept_ 

**==> picture [368 x 213] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
CPU<br>Port Arbitration<br>(configured via RCRB)<br>Root Complex<br>Memory<br>1 2 3<br>VC0<br>Port Arbitration<br>Switch<br>(configured via PPB)<br>VC0 VC0<br>VC0 VC0<br>Endpoint Endpoint Endpoint Endpoint<br>A B C D<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**262** 

**Chapter 7: Quality of Service** 

_Figure 7‐15: Port Arbitration Tables for Each VC_ 

**==> picture [320 x 233] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Extended Capability Header<br>Port VC Capability 1 Ext. VC Count<br>VAT Offset Port VC Capability 2<br>Port VC Status Port VC Control<br>PAT0 Offset VC Resource Cap (0)<br>VC Resource Control (0)<br>VC Resource Status (0) RsvdP<br>PATn Offset VC Resource Cap (n)<br>VC Resource Control (n)<br>VC Resource Status (n) RsvdP<br>VC Arbitration Table (VAT)<br>Port Arbitration Table 0 (PAT0)<br>Port Arbitration Table n (PATn)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Although it isn’t stated in the spec, the process of arbitrating between different packet streams also implies the use of additional buffers to accumulate traffic from each port in the egress port as illustrated in Figure 7‐16 on page 264. This example illustrates two ingress ports (1 and 2) whose transactions are routed to an egress port (3). The actions taken by the switch include the following: 

1. Packets arriving at the ingress ports are directed to the appropriate flow control buffers (VC) based on the TC/VC mapping. 

2. Packets are forwarded from the flow control buffers to the routing logic, which determines and routes them to the proper egress port. 

3. Packets routed to the egress port (3) use TC/VC mapping to determine into which VC buffer they should be placed. 

4. A set of buffers is associated with each of the ingress ports, allowing the ingress port number to be tracked until port arbitration can be done. 

5. Port arbitration logic determines the order in which transactions are sent from each group of ingress buffers. 

**263** 

**PCI Ex ress Technolo p gy** 

_Figure 7‐16: Port Arbitration Buffering_ 

**==> picture [356 x 245] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Ingress Ports Egress Port<br>Port Arbiter<br>Port 2<br>Port 1<br>TC0:TC3 1 VC0 VC0<br>Port 2 VC0 VC Arbiter<br>Port 3 VC0<br>3<br>Port 1<br>VC0<br>TC0:TC1 2 Port 1<br>TC2:TC4 VC7<br>VC5<br>Port 3 Port 2 VC7<br>VC7<br>Port Arbiter<br>TC/VC Mapping Routing Logic<br>TC/VC Mapping<br>TC/VC Mapping Routing Logic<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Port Arbitration Mechanisms** 

The actual port arbitration mechanisms defined are similar to the models used for VC arbitration. Configuration software determines the capability for a port by reading the registers shown in Figure 7‐17 on page 265 and selects the port arbitration scheme to use for each VC. 

**264** 

**Chapter 7: Quality of Service** 

_Figure 7‐17: Software Selects Port Arbitration Scheme_ 

**==> picture [276 x 325] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
VCn Resource Capability Register<br>31                 24 23 22            16 15 14 13            8 7                     0<br>Port Arbitration Maximum Time Port Arbitration<br>RsvdP<br>Table Offset Slots Capability<br>RsvdP<br>Reject Snoop Transactions<br>Undefined<br>7      6    5    4   3     2     1     0<br>Rsvd<br>WRR with 256 Phases (101b)<br>Time-based WRR with 128 Phases (100b)<br>WRR with 128 Phases (011b)<br>WRR with 64 Phases (010b)<br>WRR with 32 Phases (001b)<br>Hardware Fixed Arbitration Scheme (000b)<br>VCn Resource Control Register<br>31              26 24            19 17 16 15  8 7                     0<br>VC<br>RsvdP ID RsvdP RsvdP TC/VC Map<br>Load Port Arbitration Table<br>Port Arbitration Select<br>VC Enable<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Hardware-Fixed Arbitration** 

This mechanism doesn’t require software setup. Once selected, it’s managed solely by hardware. The actual arbitration scheme is chosen by the hard‐ ware designer, possibly based on the expected demands for the device. This may simply ensure fairness or it may optimize some aspect of the design, but it doesn’t support differentiated or isochronous services. 

## **Weighted Round Robin Arbitration** 

Just like the weighted round robin mechanism in VC arbitration, software can set up the port arbitration table so that some ports receive more oppor‐ 

**265** 

**PCI Ex ress Technolo p gy** 

tunities than others. This approach assigns different weights to traffic com‐ ing from different ports. 

As the table is scanned, each phase specifies the port number from which the next packet is received. Once the packet is delivered, the arbitration logic immediately proceeds to the next phase. If no transaction is pending transmission for the selected port, the arbiter advances immediately to the next phase. There is no time value associated with these entries. 

Four table lengths are given for WRR port arbitration, determined by the number of phases used by the table. Presumably, a larger number of entries in the table allows for more interesting ratios of arbitration selection. On the other hand, a smaller number of entries would use less storage and cost less. 

## **Time-Based, Weighted Round Robin Arbitration (TBWRR)** 

This mechanism is required for isochronous support. As the name implies, time‐based weighted round robin adds the element of time to each arbitra‐ tion phase. Just as in WRR the port arbiter delivers one transaction from the ingress port VC buffer indicated by the Port Number of the current phase. Now though, rather than immediately advancing to the next phase, the time‐based arbiter waits until the current virtual timeslot elapses before advancing. This ensures that transactions are accepted from the ingress port buffer at regular intervals. If the selected port does not have a packet ready to send then nothing will be sent until the next timeslot. Note that the timeslot does not govern the duration of the transfer, but rather the interval between transfers. The maximum duration of a transaction is the time it takes to complete the round robin and return to the original timeslot. The length of the timeslot may change in the future, but currently has the value of 100ns. 

Time‐based WRR arbitration supports a maximum table length of 128 phases, but the actual number of table entries available for a given VC may be less than that. The value is hardware initialized and reported in the _Max‐ imum Time Slots_ field of each virtual channel that supports TBWRR, as shown in Figure 7‐18 on page 267. 

**266** 

**Chapter 7: Quality of Service** 

_Figure 7‐18: Maximum Time Slots Register_ 

**==> picture [331 x 95] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
31                 24 23 22            16 15 14 13            8 7                     0<br>Port Arbitration Maximum Time Port Arbitration<br>RsvdP<br>Table Offset Slots Capability<br>RsvdP<br>Reject Snoop Transactions<br>Undefined<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Loading the Port Arbitration Tables** 

The actual size and format of the Port Arbitration Tables are a function of the number of phases and the number of ingress ports supported by the Switch, RCRB, or Root Port that supports peer‐to‐peer transfers. The maximum number of ingress ports supported by the Port Arbitration Table is 256 ports. The actual number of bits within each table entry is design dependent and governed by the number of ingress ports whose transactions can be delivered to the egress port. The size of each table entry is reported in the 2‐bit _Port Arbitration Table Entry Size_ field of Port VC Capability Register 1. The permissible values are: 

- 00b — 1 bit (selects between 2 ports) 

- 01b — 2 bits (4 ports) 
